---
title: COMP 354
layout: course
---

Adapted from Stuart Thiel's lecture, 2018 Summer.

<!--more-->

# People and Porcess

# Development Phases & Testing and TDD

## Development Phases

## Testing and TDD

### Who test?

* Outside testers are objective
* Inside testers can be biased, but know their software
* Within a team, worth having developers and colleagues test code

### What is a good test?

* Catches most bugs with least effort
* One from each type of test class
* What might a test class be, given this?
* Testing randomly?
* Testing exhaustively?

### Why types of tests?

* Different types of tests match up with different artifacts
* Different types of tests reveal/confirm different types of issues/features

### What types of tests?

* Unit Testing (P474)
    * Step-by-step with coding
    * In OOD, a unit is usually a class
    *  In functional development, it can be a method/function being tested
    * Makes use of stubs and drivers
    * Should be automated

* Integration Testing
    * Test the quality of the documentation and communication
    * Finding side effects
    * ncremental integration is best
    * Top-down or Bottom-up
        * Top-down
            * Verifies major control or decision points early
            * Depth-first: tests integration of critical paths of modules
            * Breadth-first: is good as integration is often tight along a horizontal layer
		* Bottom-up
            * Skips the need for stubs
            * builds (or clusters) are groupings of low-level modules that have been integrated
            * drivers test these integrated clusters
            * as you move up, throw out the drivers and replace with next level to be integrated
    * Regression Testing
        * Find a bug, write a test that catches it. 
        * That bug is fixed when regression tests passes
        * That bug should never come back
    * System-level (Validation) Testing
       * Tests user-visible features
       * Tests imitate user interactions with system
    * Acceptance Testing (2.P183)
       * a test of the requirements
       * Leffingwell is focused on Story Acceptance testing, that’s ok
       * Does a user using the system see high level functionality they expect?
       * Does a user using the system see the feature they expect?
       * What about non-functional requirements?
    * Black box Testing
    * White box Testing 
    * Other Types of Tests
       * What types of things from the artifacts aren’t tested by the mentioned tests?

### Testing strategy

* Inception and Elaboration may have more focus on unit test, but still have acceptance tests.
* As you move on, Integration tests and System tests become more relevant
* As soon as you have bugs, regression tests are relevant


# Requirements

## What are requirements?

* "Requirements are capabilities and conditions to which the system–and more broadly, the project–must conform"
* "Inception is Not the Requirements Phase"
* Needs drive features, features drive requirements
* Requirements are best when understood by both developers and customers

## What are stories?

* In Scrum, a Story is a brief statement of intent describing something the system can do for a user
* Stories are negotiable, and should be small enough to make good estimates on
* User Stories are what we are mostly concerned with
* Stories can also include other work items, but those aren’t really related to requirements

## What are features?

* Bridge gap between User needs and Software Solutions (Requirements)
* Most systems described in 25-50 features  Features are Program Backlog items in Scrum
* You can Acceptance Test features

## When we must have requirements?

* Design and development start while only 10-20% of requirements are established
* Requirements, even established ones change
* "on average, 25% of requirements change on software projects"
* Study on waterfall-esque requirements showed 45% were never used, 19 % were rarely used
* Iterative approach: have the requirements you need, when you require them.

# Use Cases

# Structural Design Class & RDD and GRASP Patterns

## Structural Design

## Structural Design: Class Deagrams and OOD

## RDD and GRASP Patterns

# Design Patterns

## Design Patterns

### What are patterns? [1, p.278-279]

* Developers ”build up a repertoire of both general principles and idiomatic solutions”[1, p.278]
* When described in terms of a name, a problem and a solution, we call these patterns.
* Pattern names let us quickly share a lot of information
* Patterns are identified, not created. ”codify existing tried-and-true-knowledge”[1, p.279]

### GRASP and GoF [1, p.280-281]

* Named patterns in software are attributed to Kent Beck, mid-80s
* Gang of Four book came out in 1994, became the accepted design guide, describing 23 core Design
Patterns.
* GRASP patterns were popularized by Larman[1, ] in 2000-2010s
* The General approach to Pattern-Based design is broad

### Which Patterns to Consider?

* It is worth taking a look at Pattern-Based Design in general
* We will finish by looking at the remaining GRASP Patterns, and some important GoF patterns

### General Pattern-Based Design [2, p.347]

* Most problems you face have already been solved
* The trick is to find the solution and apply it within your design-space

### Magic Steps [2, p.347]

> The requirements model is examined in order to isolate the hierarchical set of problems to be
solved. The problem space is partitioned so that subsets of problems associated with specific
software functions and features can be identified. Problems can also be organized by type:
architectural, component-level, algorithmic, user interface, etc. Once a subset of problems is
defined, one or more pattern repositories are searched to determine if an existing design pattern,
represented at an appropriate level of abstraction, exists. Patterns that are applicable are adapted to the specific needs of the software to be built. Custom problem solving is applied in situations for which no patterns can be found.

* It turns out that while this is effectively true, there’s more effort than is implied
* Still, developers have built up many pattern repositories to help with all sorts of software design

### A General Approach to General Patterns [2,p.348-349]

* Problems have context, and qualities, which pressman calls ”forces”
* Given a context and the qualities of a problem, the goal is to find the best matching solution.
* Pressman uses travel between New York and LA as a base example
* ”Design patterns, if used effectively, will invariably make you a better software designer.”[2, p.349]

### Pattern Types and Standard Groups [2,p.350-351]

* There are many kinds of patterns
    * Architectural
    * Data
    * Component (or Design)
    * User Interface
    * WebApp
* GoF broke patterns into groups
    * Creational: focus on creation, composition and representation of objects while hiding how these things are done
    * Structural: focus on how objects are organized and integrated to create something larger
    * Behavioural: focus on the assignment of responsibility between objects and the manner in which they communicate


## GRASP Patterns

### Polymorphism

``` java
public interface Shape {
    void draw();
}

public class Circle implements Shape {
    void draw(){
        // do something
    }
}

public class Square implements Shape {
    void draw(){
        // do something
    }
}
```

``` Java
public void test(Shape shape) {
    shape.draw();
}

```

### Pure Fabrication

* **Problem**: What object should have the responsibility, when you do not want to violate High Cohesion and Low Coupling, or other goals, but solutions offered by Expert are not appropriate. , Larman, p 421. You must assign a responsibility to a class, but assigning it to a class that represents a conceptual model entity would ruin its low coupling or high cohesion. You resolve this problem by fabricating a class that does not represent an entity in your conceptual model. , Patterns in Java, Vol. 2, p 73. In other words, not all responsibilities can be assigned to domain classes, especially responsibilities that deal with implementation technologies (i.e., persistence storage, network communication, ...).

* **Solution**: Assign a highly cohesive set of responsibilities to an artificial or convenience class that does not represent a problem domain concept -- something made up, to support high cohesion, low coupling, and reuse. , Larman, p 421.

### Indirection

### Protected Variation

## References


# Gang of Four Patterns

> [1, p.280,435,436]

* Named after Gamma, Helm, Johnson and Vlissides, who wrote the mid-90s book "Design Patterns"
* Covered 23 core design patterns, arguably the most popular software design pattern language in use today.
* "15 are common use and most useful."[1, p.436]

## Adapter [1, p.436-440]

* **Problem**: incompatible interface, similar components with differing interfaces
* **Solution**: Convert the original interface into another interface through an intermediate adapter object.
* Polymorphism from GRASP uses the adapter pattern, the adapter being the common interface.
* Often a common interface will be made, and adapters implementing that interface will delegate to the varying objects, hiding the differences.
* Example: TODO

## Factory [1, p.440-442]

* GoF pattern is actually "Abstract Factory"
* We’re talking about Simple Factory or Concrete Factory here, but widespread, so let’s pretend it’s one of the GoF^2
* **Problem**: Need to create object with special considerations like complex creation logic, the need to separate concerns and hide variation in the created
objects, the need to generally maintain high cohesion.
* **Solution**: Create a Pure Fabrication object called a Factory that handles the creation.

### Factory in Action

> In my Masters thesis I advised the use of a Factory to take care of Domain Object creation because it impacted database, caching and Unit of Work concerns
that had no business in most areas that would otherwise take care of creating those Domain Object

## Singleton [1, p.442-446]

* **Problem**: Exactly one instance of a class is allowed. Other objects need a golbal and single point of access
* **Solution**: Define a static method of the class that returns the singleton
* Concurrency control is common around Singletons.
* Example: TODO

### Why not make it all static?
* instance-methods allow subclassing, refinement (overloading) of the Singleton class for effective reuse. Static methods aren’t polymorphic, and generally don’t support overwriting in languages where such things are allowed (part of the definition of the class)
* Remote access methods generally support only instance-methods. (e.g. Java’s RMI)
* A class is not always needed as a singleton in all applications. Sometimes you figure out it’s not a singleton later. Instance-based, this is an easy fix (generally you don’t need to do anything).

### Singleton in Action

> In my Masters thesis I advised the use of a variant on this pattern to allow the trivial creation of a single-access point within a web request, the
ThreadLocal Singleton. Each request was guaranteed a Thread for its sole use for the duration of the request. Request Attributes, standard fare for web applications, were readily stored in this ThreadLocal Singleton so did
not have to be passed around through various Commands and Views, thus greatly reducing coupling between Commands and Views, while extending flexibility.


## Strategy  [1, p.447-452]

* **Problem**: Algorithms or policies can or will change, need to be decided at run-time
* **Solution**: Define each algorithm/policy/strategy in a separate class with a common interface
* Often this leads to the instance of the strategy being created by a Factory that is passed enough info to know what to do.
* Polymorphism and Protected Variation at work!
* Example: TODO

## Composite [1, p.452-461]

* **Problem**: A number of similar objects need to be treated atomically
* Solution: Define an interface for composite objects that is shared with the atomic objects it composes
* works well with the strategy pattern, as certain strategies may just be several simpler strategies applied together (e.g. discounts)
* Composite of related elements starts looking like proper object-oriented design? Larmen gives a strange example called IDs to Objects
* when using composites, it’s generally a good practice to pass around the composites instead of digging out the children (components). Composite Pattern done well supports this.
* Example: TODO

## Facade [1, p.461-463]

* **Problem**: There are many components in a subsystem, each with some behaviour that is needed, but knowledge of this subsystem or access to the other behaviour is not
* **Solution**: Define a single point of access that provides an interface on the desired behaviours and encapsulates knowledge of the weird subsystem so nothing else has
to know about it.

## Observer/Subscriber [1, p.463-471]

* **Problem**: Different things want to know about different events and will behave in different ways, but low coupling is desired
* **Solution**: define subscribers via an interface that listen, and then have them register to listen to publishers of events that they care about. The publishers will notify the correct subscribers at the correct times.

### Observer/Subscriber in Action

* Frequently use in UIs


## References

[1] Craig Larman. Applying UML and Patterns: An Introduction to
Object-Oriented Analysis and Design and Iterative Development.
Addison Wesley, 3rd edition, 2013

# Architecture

## Architecture

* "In its simplest form, architecture is the structure or organization of program components(modules), the manner in which these components interact, and the structure of data that are used by the components" [1, p.223]
* "The logical architecture is the large-scale organization of the software classes into packages (or name spaces), subsystems, and layers"[2, p.199]
* "Architecture is what you have left when you take away everything you don’t need to explain how the system works" [3, p.393, by way of Krutchen]

### Architecture as Structure [2, 197-201]

* Larman really only talks about the Layered style.
* A key focus in Larman is the organization of code, via package diagrams, into layers to communicate project structure.
* This logical organization to communicate structure still applies exactly the same way with other styles besides the Layered style.

### Architecture as Risk

* Complex or high risk issues should be highlighted in the architecture
* These often end up being structural issues, or at least can end up being thought of that way once they are understood.


## N+1 View Model [2, p.655]

* To learn about a system architecture, we need to look at it in different ways
* Larman describes what has evolved into the N+1 model for doing so, with each of N being one of the ways to look at the system
* The +1 represents key architectural use cases

### Architectural Recap

* We are concerned with the overall important structure of the system
* We are concerned with risk areas of the system.

### Views [2, 657-659]

Not all need be included, use the ones that communicate about architecturally relevant things

* Logical
* Process
* Deployment
* Data
* Security
* Implementation
* Development
* Use Cases

### Logical [2, p.657]

* Conceptual organization of the software in terms of important layers, subsystems, packages,frameworks, classes, and interface
* Summarizes functionality of major software elements
* Communicate use case realizations as interaction diagrams (usually sequence diagrams) to illustrate key aspects of the system
* Shows an important subset of the system design, generally by way of class diagrams and interaction diagrams.

### Process [2, p.658]

* Processes and threads, their responsibilities, collaborations and allocations to elements described in the logical view.
* In a webapp, what do we know about Threads/Processes?

### Deployment [2, p.658]

* A description of the physical deployment of processes and components to the various processing nodes of your system
* A description of the network configuration between nodes
* As some of you have explored, you can do a lot on the client-side.

### Data [2, p.658]

* Overview of data flows, persistent data schemea, any object relational mappings between persistent data and in-memory objects.
* Communicate important stored-procedures or triggers

### Security [2, p.658]

* Overview of security schemes, points within the system (and architecture) where security is applied.
* I differ with Larman’s approach to a diagram focus for this. It may be doable some places, but text describing its application, supported by class/sequence (or any
interaction diagrams) are best to describe this.

### Implementation [2, p.658-659]

* A view on not just the software code as given in the logical view or design, but including libraries and resources, all organized by their physical location in the
system (folder structure)
* I imagine a discussion of framework or even moreso engine, is relevant here; Explaining the use of Unity and how it leads to an organization of files makes sense.
* Explanation of why should supplement any diagrams of file layout, etc.
* For example, a new member of a software team could use this view to guide their understanding of where files go and why they are organized in a given way.

### Development [2, p.659]

* Description of the running and testing of the system.
* Also covers things like revision control usage and policies
* repo usage, convention and continious integration setup is appropriate here.
* Should probably also cover coding conventions, though not listed in Larman.

### Use Cases [2, p.659]

* Summary of most architecturally significant use cases
* Probably duplicate the UCM, but only showing those important UCs.
* Explanation of why and how are important, the diagram is just for convenience.

## References

[1] Roger Pressman. Software Engineering: A Practitioner’s Approach (7th ed.). Pearson, 2010.

[2] Craig Larman. Applying UML and Patterns: An Introduction to Object-Oriented Analysis and Design and Iterative Development. Addison Wesley, 3rd edition, 2013.

[3] Dean Leffingwell. Agile Software Requirements: Lean Requirements Practices for Teams, Programs, and the Enterprise. Pearson, 2011.